**Suggested Title:** "Python Backend Developer Interview Guide: Must-Have and Nice-to-Have Questions"

Alternative titles:
- "FastAPI & Python Backend: Complete Interview Question Set (3-5 Years Experience)"
- "Structured Interview Questions for Python Backend Developer Role"
- "Core Python, FastAPI, and AWS: Interview Deep Dive"

---

Here's a structured interview question set for the Forestrat.AI Python Backend Developer (3–5 years) JD — divided into Must Have (Core) and Nice to Have (Supplementary) sections.
🧠 MUST HAVE
Core Python (Heavy Focus — 60%)
Conceptual & Technical Depth
1. Explain Python's memory management model.
How do reference counting and garbage collection work?
2. Difference between shallow copy and deep copy — give an example.
3. How are mutable and immutable objects handled in function arguments?
4. How does Python's Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) affect concurrency?
5. Explain how iterators and generators work internally.
6. What are closures and decorators?
Write one practical use case for each.
7. How do context managers (with statement) work?
Implement one without using contextlib.
8. Difference between multiprocessing and multithreading in Python.
When to use which?
9. How would you debug performance issues in Python?
(Profilers, cProfile, memory_profiler, etc.)
10. Explain how exceptions are propagated and best practices for handling them in production code.
11. What is asyncio?
When would you use async vs threads?
12. Explain the use of typing and type hints in modern Python.
How does it impact maintainability?
13. How do you handle circular imports and module structuring in a large project?
14. Describe a design pattern you've used in Python (e.g., Factory, Singleton, Observer) and why.
FastAPI (20%)
1. Compare FastAPI with Flask and Django — what makes FastAPI suitable for scalable microservices?
2. How does FastAPI leverage Pydantic for validation?
3. Explain dependency injection in FastAPI.
4. How would you implement authentication (JWT/OAuth2) in FastAPI?
5. How do you handle background tasks and async endpoints in FastAPI?
6. How do you version APIs in FastAPI?
Data Pipelines & Workflow Orchestration (10%)
1. What is the purpose of Airflow/NiFi/Prefect in data workflows?
2. How would you build a pipeline to ingest, clean, and transform data?
3. How do you handle retries, task dependencies, and failure recovery in Airflow?
4. Difference between task scheduling vs orchestration?
5. How do you monitor data flow in production?
AWS + Database (10%)
1. Explain how you'd design a data storage workflow using S3, DuckDB/PostgreSQL, and AWS compute.
2. How do you handle schema evolution in data systems like Iceberg or DuckDB?
3. Difference between relational (PostgreSQL) and analytical (DuckDB) workloads.
4. Explain data caching strategies in AWS-based backends.
5. How would you secure AWS credentials and keys in code deployments?
🌱 NICE TO HAVE
AI & Productivity Tools
1. How do tools like Cursor or Copilot improve developer efficiency?
2. What AI-assisted features would you add to your IDE workflow?
3. Explain the trade-off between model cost and performance for AI API integrations.
4. Describe a scenario where AI-driven code suggestions improved your workflow.
Caching / Redis
1. When should you use Redis?
2. Explain cache invalidation strategies (write-through, lazy, TTL).
3. How do you handle data consistency between Redis and a persistent DB?
Frontend / React (Basic Awareness)
1. How would you design API endpoints to best serve a React frontend?
2. How do you handle CORS in FastAPI?
3. What JSON response patterns make frontend integration easier?
Fintech Domain
1. How do you handle sensitive data (PII) in code?
2. How would you design transaction-safe APIs?
3. What are some key reliability or audit requirements in financial systems?
Would you like me to turn this into a multi-round structured interview plan (e.g., Round 1 – Python Core, Round 2 – Systems & FastAPI, Round 3 – AWS/Data, etc.) with sample expected answers for the Must-Have questions?
1. In the code file, we are using async def.
What is the purpose of that?
2. Is FAST API Single or multi threaded?
How is it achieved?
FastAPI itself is single-threaded by default, but it's designed to work with asynchronous programming and can handle multiple concurrent requests efficiently.
Here's what you need to know:
FastAPI's Threading Model:
FastAPI uses async/await to handle concurrency, not multi-threading
When you define route handlers with async def, they run in an event loop (powered by Starlette, which uses asyncio)
This allows a single thread to manage many concurrent requests without blocking
In Practice:
A single FastAPI worker process runs one event loop
Multiple requests can be handled concurrently within that single thread through async I/O
If one request blocks (like making a database call), the event loop can switch to handling another request while waiting for the I/O to complete
Multiple Workers:
While FastAPI itself is single-threaded, you typically run it with multiple worker processes (using Uvicorn, Gunicorn, etc.)
Each worker process runs its own event loop, so you effectively get multiple concurrent streams of execution
This is how FastAPI scales across multiple cores on a server
Important Distinction:
Async endpoints (async def) are non-blocking and efficient for I/O-bound operations
Sync endpoints (def without async) can block the event loop, especially if they perform CPU-intensive work or blocking I/O
So while FastAPI is single-threaded at the core, it's built for high concurrency through async programming, and you scale it horizontally with multiple worker processes.
For true multi-threading within a single FastAPI process, you'd need to explicitly use Python's threading module, which isn't the recommended approach for FastAPI applications.
3. How does Python's Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) affect concurrency?
Python's Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) is a significant constraint on true multi-threading in Python, and it's important to understand how it affects your FastAPI application.
What is the GIL?
The GIL is a mutex that protects access to Python objects in CPython (the standard Python implementation).
It ensures that only one thread can execute Python bytecode at a time, even on multi-core systems.
This was designed to simplify memory management in CPython.
How it affects concurrency:
With the GIL, you cannot achieve true parallel execution of Python code across multiple threads.
If you have multiple threads, they'll take turns executing Python bytecode rather than running simultaneously.
This means multi-threading won't help you speed up CPU-bound tasks—only I/O-bound tasks benefit from threading.
Good news for your FastAPI code:
Your application uses async/await, which completely bypasses the GIL problem.
Here's why:
Async is not multi-threading: Async uses a single thread with an event loop.
While one coroutine waits for I/O (database query, API call, etc.), the event loop switches to execute another coroutine.
This is cooperative multitasking, not preemptive threading.
No GIL contention: Since you're using a single thread per worker, there's no competition for the GIL.
The event loop efficiently manages many concurrent operations without the overhead of thread context switching.
I/O operations release the GIL: When your code performs I/O operations (network requests, database calls), those operations release the GIL.
This allows any background threads to run during the I/O wait.
When the GIL becomes a problem:
If you were to use multi-threading in your FastAPI handlers (like threading.Thread or concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor), the GIL would limit performance for CPU-bound work.
For example:
python# BAD - GIL limits this
@app.post("/bad-cpu-work")
async def bad_cpu_work(request: Request):
result = cpu_intensive_task()  # Blocks the event loop
return result
4. What is asyncio?
When would you use async vs threads?
5. Describe a design pattern you've used in Python (e.g., Factory, Singleton, Observer) and why.
6. How would you debug performance issues in Python?
(Profilers, cProfile, memory_profiler, etc.)
Real world performance and scalability issues when we use FastAPI or when we use microservices


 Please read about Celery
Celery is a distributed task queue library for Python that allows you to run time-consuming tasks asynchronously and schedule them to run at specific times. It's commonly used to offload long-running operations from web applications so they don't block user requests.
Here are the key concepts:
Basic Idea: Instead of having your web server wait for a slow operation to complete, you send it to Celery as a task. Celery workers (separate processes or machines) pick up and execute these tasks in the background, while your application continues responding to users immediately.
Message Broker: Celery uses a message broker (like Redis or RabbitMQ) to communicate between your application and the workers. Your app puts task messages into the broker, and workers pull them out and execute them.
Common Use Cases:

Sending emails without blocking the user's request
Processing large files or data
Making external API calls
Generating reports
Running periodic tasks on a schedule